 This week we'll start by jumping right into rates and yields. And then we'll take an extended period of time to look at the argument for and the argument against tariffs in an academic sense. We'll draw some graphs and some supply and demand lines and we'll talk about economics. Let's have a look at where we were this past week. Look at rates, money market rates, very well behaved, except over here on the one month. While we're looking at the drop of eight basis points, 4.28, that is below the overnight rate of 4.33, but it is still in between the 4.25 to the 4.5, which is the target range for the Fed funds rate. Look at 4.28, that is threatening the lower bound. Look at reverse repo, let's go all the way over here. Increased 286 last week was 200 billion now, 286 billion and you have an elevated level of reserves. So that can be explained by what's going on in the market. Money is leaving the equity market and for most of last week, money was leaving the bond market and the question always is where the money is leaving, where is it going? It clearly is going into the money market. Very short term because we have a big uncertain event coming up April 2nd. The market can handle a lot. The market can handle volatility. The market can handle risk. It knows how to price that stuff, but uncertainty is the worst thing and we have, I think, maximum uncertainty right now. So the one-month yield dropping the 4.28, the reverse repo increasing and reserves increasing are a direct result of the level of uncertainty. We will get certainty on April 2nd once the reciprocal tariffs are announced and then that money will come out and go somewhere. Where? I don't know. That's the point of waiting until you are certain. Money doesn't mind going somewhere with volatility because it knows how to price it. It just doesn't like going somewhere where there's uncertainty. So uncertainty will end hopefully, April 2nd. What we don't want is, okay, you get an exception, you get an exception, tariffs for you and for everyone who got an exception, let's revisit it in 30 days again. He's kicking the can down the road 30 days at a time. You get something like that on Wednesday. S&P could easily correct another 10% into bear market territory. Small caps are almost that bear market territory now. So hopefully, hopefully, whatever happens on Wednesday, good news, bad news, whatever it is, just certainty. Because the market can price everything else. It can price risk and volatility, but it can't price uncertainty. So let's just get to that. And hopefully next week, we'll see this correct back to a range closer to 4.35, 4.33, 4.3 over here on the form. A drop in the reverse repo and a drop in reserves as money goes out and goes into assets. What's it going to go into? The bond market or the equity market, well, that's all up to one guy. And I think that's the way he wants it. It's all up to one guy. Let's look at the long end of the curve and on Friday, TLT really accelerated. PCE came in hotter than expected. I saw the numbers and inside you die a little. It's like, great, there goes TLT again. And no, it was green. And I think, okay, I give up. I have no clue what's going on anymore. I have no skill left in this market. Because if you would have just shown me the PCE numbers and said, tell me what the market looks like, I would have said, well, TLT is red. I mean, let's give it that. TLT's red gold is probably up. US dollars probably up because higher for longer. And given the spending, the amount of spending, because that's what PCE is wrapped up in, is incoming outlays, given where income was and outlays were probably a red market as well. Well, we had the red market. We had a great day in gold, but TLT. You know, you sit in there staring at the swing going, I'm glad nobody sees me. It's to be laughing at me right now saying, you don't know what the hell you're doing. I got to admit, I did not see that. But long end of the curve had quite a day. But week over week, TLT didn't do that well, down point six, too. However, it did be SPY, the large caps that are down 1.53%. The chart, if you look at the 10 year yield, this is rather interesting. You had a low 10 year yield for a while. Then you had a run up and a really run up. This was the October lows, which is what you're seeing up here. All of this was the October lows. See, all of the capital market curve. This is the low period, the cycle high on yields. The capital October came down. Then beginning of the year, you had this run up again. This is sort of making the rounds of the discussion on yields is the 10 year over the last two years. Three years has drawn out a clear head and shoulders pattern. So, based on where we are right now, we're at 4.27. If you take the height from the head to the neck line, which is 498 to 427, 75 basis points, you can usually, or at least technical analysts, would draw their lines down and say, this is probably the extent of the next move. That would bring the 10 year to 3.5%. That would make the treasury very, very happy. I think that would take some pressure off of Powell as well if we got that down to 3.5%. But these are lines on charts. There's no reason why that need work out. Every time you see a head and shoulders pattern like this, flip a coin. Half the time it will do what the pattern says. The other half, it will just draw out something different so that this pattern disappears and turns into something else. We have 38 days for the next FOMC meeting. The probability of no basis points change is dropping. Now 82% from 87%. So 18%, close to 18% for a rate cut. The minutes are in 10 days. Minutes used to be interesting, but you get so much fed speak right now. And it gets projected so much because everybody hangs off of every word. But by the time you get to the minutes, you go, yeah, I've heard all of this before. So there's almost nothing exciting left in the minutes. It's a big week for jobs. Joltz. We get in two days. We get in three days. Initial claims. We get in four days. Nothing's showing up here by the way for government layoffs. However, I have confirmed now, at least to the best that I can, that if there is severance involved, you do not file for initial claims until after your severance period. So it could be many months before any layoffs are show up in initial claims. Many of the jobs report in five days for both Canada and the US. That would be a full week, but April 2nd, Donald Trump does not like anything to take away the cameras from him, not even economic reports. You have the day of liberation, whatever that means. Reciprocal tariffs on April 2nd. And apparently you're going to like it, he says. You're going to be pleasantly surprised, he says, but who knows what that means. High SM manufacturing PMI, you get in two days, I SM services PMI, you get in four days. I think we've seen this under 50 for long enough that we simply just don't care anymore. Plus it's 12% of the entire economy. So really it's not so big as the services. That's going to be the big one. And I would look for the prices paid index and the employment index in each of these, especially for ISM, for the manufacturing. Look at the prices, prices paid and expectation of prices paid. That's going to be an important one. Powell in five days, 1125 on Friday. Powell is scheduled. Let's go over to our curves. We still have an inversion in the three month to 10 year. There's not a big inversion, six basis points. And the Fed funds futures back to 74 basis points between now and the end of the year. We have six FOMC meetings left. This is pricing in three in six. Yeah, I seem to think it's a little more, but three in six. I don't like the odds of betting at three in six. If this guy were one in six, then yeah, load up on Fed funds futures, three in six. Wednesday could change the whole thing. If you get reciprocal tariffs across the board with no exemptions and no caravans for anything in these 25% tariffs on auto stick right across the board, this will quickly price in five to six. It could be that that severe. But if you get these car votes on Wednesday, where for Mexico and Canada, you get a statement of, well, we don't know how to price the tariff because of the US versus Canadian content. We get that parts across the board. We don't know how to price it. So we're not going to put it in place just yet, but we're going to figure it out. Don't you worry. Another 30 days will figure it out in 30 days. It will be something like that. And if the reciprocal tariffs are more thought out and more targeted and made more sense, maybe someone China, maybe someone India, maybe someone Germany, but you know, the big, the big across the board stuff is off the table. This could quickly move to price in only one. So there's going to be huge volatility in this contract on Wednesday. And again, the market can price that in. What can't price in is the uncertainty. Who the hell knows? So that's just to kind of avoid that one for now because it's going to be a coin flip on to figure out, well, which direction are we going to go? Because that is what good leaders do. Maximum uncertainty, right? That's the sign of good leadership. Mexico Central Bank cut rates 50 basis points last week. Let's have a look at real rates and the break even rates. Interesting, interesting story here. Look at the slope between the five year and the 10 year. The real rate here 1.4 versus 1.9. 50 basis points slope in the nominal space. It's only 29. So we would expect an inverted curve on the break even rates, meaning higher near term inflation expectations falling as we go out further. And we have that 2.584337. The 20s are weird tenors. So we usually just ignore 3.7 down to 2.7. So you have inflation expectations or what are called break even rates difference between tips and nominal downward sloping. Where real rates are upwards sloping the steeper this gets. The more likely market participants are betting on a recession because this would start to get a lot more inverted meaning that inflation expectations longer out are getting lower and lower. Nothing gets there like a recession. So this is signaling a direction towards recession. OAS still saying nothing to see here please go away. Investment grade no change week over week. AA nothing triple B only one. It's the high yield that is showing something widening of 10 basis points on the index. Double B's widened by 10. Triple C widened by 7. Still that's really nothing. Considering the volatility we're seeing in public equity markets. The volatility we're seeing in treasuries. The spreads are going nothing to see here folks leave us alone go away. Same with mortgage rate 6.65 only a change of two basis points week over week. Mortgage apps now 2% for the week ending March 21st. And let's look at GDP now because it got really ugly negative 2.8% and that's after updating the trade deficit. Trade deficit is X minus M GDP which is Y is equal to the consumer plus investment plus the government sector plus the trade balance X minus M. So with some updates to these components the contribution to Y from the trade balance which is a trade deficit. One from negative 3.95 to negative 4.79 which brought this from negative 1.8 to negative 2.8. This over here goal adjusted is well what if you took the import of gold off because that's happening for other reasons. So let's take the import of gold off it would be negative 0.5. And my thinking is this is going to get worse going into March 31st which is the end of the first quarter. Last week one guy announced 25% tariffs on all autos coming into the US. That stands softened as the week went on but still that was announced. And because as a good leader he instills a lot of certainty the auto makers are saying since we have no clue what this guy is going to do. What this one guy, not the government, not the administration, not Congress, not the Republican party. What this one guy will do. Let's just bring as much into the countries we possibly can before this date. So when we get first quarter GDP, if we look at the components I'm sure you'll see imports taking a huge chunk out of GDP, the surge in imports because of trying a front run the uncertainty of this tariff is going to make Q1 GDP look pretty bad. Which I don't know if the Fed is going to do enough to look past it. Are they going to say well look part of the bad reading for Q1 if it is a bad reading is let's just think about the trade deficit. Let's take gold out and then let's take a lot of these autos out. Let's normalize it because that never would have happened. Will it adjust it for the amount of inventory that has shown up? Will they do that or will they see this as having a psychological effect that will affect the decisions of other companies that then say that's an ugly number. Let's adjust our plans going forward. Will it increase the probability of a rate cut? We're not going to get this number till the end of April. So we'll already have a central bank meeting behind us. Oh actually no we won't sorry. May 7th. May 7th is an central bank meeting. We'll actually see Q1 GDP before the central bank makes its decision. So I don't know why I was thinking this would come out after. So GDP, Q1 GDP just got raised in terms of its importance. It comes out before the Fed has its first has its next meeting which is May 7th. Ah okay let's have a look at SPY. Start it off the week. Pretty good Monday. Big pop. Tuesday. Sort of continued on and Wednesday Thursday and then Friday the big dump on Friday. Now down 9.25% from its all time high. It already touched 10% down before and just stopped short of correction territory at least in the regular session by 4 o'clock the 554 you're seeing here is after hours and at 555 and change down 925. Looking at small caps I WM. Heat under 200 during the course of the day but it's the finish it matters down 17.2% IJR down 17.9% small caps. 2 to 3% away from a bear market. The forward 4 quarter operating earnings dropped again in 268.81 from 269.78 which is down from 2736. So earnings expectations are coming down. 558.94 closing on the index 20.76 times forward earnings down from 21. Starting yet to be a more reasonable price but still at the upper end of the range this would have to start getting into the 18 to 19 range to say okay well that's pretty much in historical within a historical range. You're looking at a multiple of two with 268 so 530 more points off of 555 and getting to 5000 on the index would put you in that range assuming that earnings didn't fall even more if earnings fall even more to get into the 18 to 19 range it have to drop even more but you're talking about down here. Something way down here haven't been there since while a year ago and then maybe briefly threaten that back in August. Let's see what happens this week we have three companies reporting actually two companies reporting can't get it straight. That's a disappointment because there's only two or three I don't know. They both agree on Conagra and Lam Weston only LSEG has X on mobile. IV last on SPY 18.6 up from 16.6 on TLT 13.6 up from 13. Pukal ratio open interest is really interesting down to 1.89 going into the Friday protection not either being removed or far more calls being purchased 1.89.4 on TLT which is about where it's all where it's been for some time but the Pukal ratio on SPY has been over two for some time down to 1.89 so there could be some thinking much like my thinking is that when you get to April 2nd it's not going to be as bad as what we think it's going to be it's actually going to be a lot lighter not because of any change in strategy only because of these numbers. You are pretty much at corrections door on the large cap and almost at bear markets door on the small cap and you really can't blame this on Biden. This is all the result of one man and the not the volatility he's introduced but the uncertainty that he is introduced this cannot be lost on him and it cannot be lost on those around him who predominantly rely on the market and predominantly come from the market right you surround yourself with billionaires they're going to remind you every time taxes hurt them or investments hurt them so I'm sure he's looking at this saying okay okay let's see if we can't manage this into something because he his tone had changed a little last week in terms of what we can expect and the tone on the auto tariffs changed as well to the point where it was supposed to be the morning of April 3rd these things go into effect but that because of the content of the vehicle so that vehicle is assembled in Ontario Canada let's say but has 60% of the parts that had been sourced in the US then it's over 50% would not have the tariff well how do you track all of that value added in the vehicle right you got to do all the parts and then you got to do the parts of the parts and you got to do the parts of the parts can't be done not not easily all the certificate of origins that you're going to need to get that done now I've imported before I know about these certificate of origins you have to have those for your broker usually your broker is pretty good at getting them for you though so they're not going to take effect on April 3rd so right now as of right now there's only the threat of these tariffs in North America with the statement that no no don't worry about it we haven't figured it out yet but but it's common but we haven't figured it out yet that's a nice that's a nice cover place to be I'm going to explain how it would be almost impossible to reshore some of this production and that if you could reshore this production you would almost guarantee the destruction of a certain segment of the auto industry all together it would simply just disappear I'll explain that on the next screen so I think and this is just just my own thinking now I think that once we get to April 2nd we're going to have clarity the uncertainty is gone we're going to have clarity the market can can live with clarity even even if it's volatile it can live with that it just can't live with uncertainty and I think it will be bullish for the market short term that it'll be a relief that oh is that it and I think Wednesday could end up being a very green day at least for equity so going into the end of last week with the market down I did cover I was short SPY I did cover my short position I have synthetic longs for one week April 4th synthetic longs I covered my short position by selling a put that I knew would be put to me so a little put and as the market continued to fall I was able to buy the call at the same price because of interest rates we have an upward sloping forward curve on everything if you try to put in a synthetic at an at the money strike you will pay more for the call the call is price graded in the put you'll usually pay for your synthetic I got my synthetic for free actually I got my synthetic at a 2 cent gain because I got the puts I got 715 for the puts and I only paid 713 for the call so I got a slight gain but I do have a synthetic long on SPY and I am long both the small cap indexes now at these low levels there is no point in being short with IWM at 200 I mean it's already down 18% right and I am long IJR down 18% so I am long beta and I am long duration right now the only thing I'm short is micro strategy oh and Tesla I'm still short Tesla but I rolled my my put in my call forward to April 4th which got me more premium on that we'll see how that works out but I did well last week on it on on the premiums on the options let's see if I can do the same thing this next week let's take a tour through some economics here's our calendar going into the week coming up Monday the 31st oh I got white white pen there Monday the 31st Tuesday April 1st we have Joltz and there it is here day of liberation this is a reciprocal tariffs day this is the big day we have uncertainty and volatility going into April 2nd hopefully after April 2nd we'll only have volatility left day of liberation also you get ADP reports the auto tariffs were announced early but they they don't take effect on April 2nd they are delayed so what's up with that right here's a big risk day as well for a number of people out there see a fail-level one results will be out the morning of the third along with initial claims and then Friday jobs and this is the day right here so let's see if we can't give ourselves some framework in which to think about these tariffs are they good for America are they bad for America will they raise prices will they lower prices because I'm sure you've heard no prices will go lower no prices will be unaffected no prices will go higher yes they're good for America no they're not good for now I'm sure you've heard a lot of that stuff and I don't want you to blame economics economics is a tool it's meant to tame the complexity of our subject matter so that we can say things but all of economics is based on a term catorist parabas meaning all things equal we change one variable at a time economics is a simplification of reality it's not meant to be a replication of reality um we can't blame economics you have to blame the subject matter if economics if you can make the claim will economics will tell you anything you want that's because a subject matter can tell you anything you want here we need to distinguish between complicated systems and complex systems many of you have heard me explain this before for those of you new to this I will explain the difference between the two what is complicated is landing a person on Mars but it can be solved what is complicated is mapping out the human genome but it can be solved right what is complicated is building a laser but it can be solved complicated problems have solutions you just need enough engineers enough money and enough time you'll find the solution uh complex systems on the other hand have no solution they only have trade-offs that's why the sciences do well with complicated problems biology chemistry physics is because you can actually solve a problem uh but the sciences uh related to complex systems these are called social sciences economics being a social science has no solution only trade-offs that's the nature of a complex system so if we say well economics will tell you anything you want it to it's because the system will do whatever you can imagine since you need a science that can account for all of those scenarios that's economics on the one hand this on the other hand that so let's draw it out and let's see if we can't figure out all the possibilities because we want to be able to make the the tariffs will increase prices we want to make the argument that tariffs will not increase prices we want to make the argument that it's good for America and the argument that it's bad for America all with economics not because economics is fickle but because the system is fickle that's what you have to do let's start with something simple uh anybody who's been through economics can recognize this chart right away and probably are getting shivers and sweats from their first year macro class here is supply here is demand and what this is saying as the price of something drops and the quantity demanded will increase I'll buy more of its ten bucks than if it's twenty bucks right but at lower prices there'll be fewer there'll be less and less supply simply because some producers can't produce at that low price so this is the basic supply and demand chart and in economics we have something called the law of supply and the law of demand I don't like the words laws in economics all we can really say is there are tendencies and there are strong tendencies this would be the strong tendency of supply and the strong tendency of demand but certainly not a law let's put a price in there's the price level and here we're going to call these affordable cars we're going to say these are less than thirty thousand dollars less than thirty thousand dollars and we're looking at the domestic market this is the domestic market in the US this is a good representation of the domestic market where the supply is very very low simply because to make a vehicle under thirty thousand dollars you need a cost advantage the US does not have a cost advantage this is why most sub thirty thousand dollar vehicles are made in Mexico just to give you an idea here let me find some numbers for you let's see if I can find these numbers here I just did a search for them here we are let me drag these on the screen for you this is from the US this is from the Bureau where is it the US Bureau of Labor Statistics here's motor vehicles what are we looking for national average hourly earnings motor vehicles parts and manufacturing here is motor vehicle manufacturing December 24 38 48 January 25 37 82 that's preliminary but that is the hourly wage that's not the all-in wage you'll recall when the union got its contract and we heard headline all-in wages for auto workers 150 thousand a year the 37 82 that you're seeing here that's just the wage component per hour that's not the health care that's not the extra benefits that's not the overtime that's not the the pension or the pension matching that's none of that stuff that's just the hourly wage thirty seventy two which is about seventy five thousand dollars a year for Mexico you can divide that by ten I am not making that up I googled it for you Mexican auto wages I have a look over here GM the GM plant 2022 workers earned around three dollars to three 25 an hour after a recent after recent wage here it is here two seventy to five twenty five with higher wages in unionized areas for skilled trade by the way when I Google I really like this AI overview that you get right away I rarely get down to the search results now I just look at these and then you have all of the links over here these are so relevant now it is getting better but yeah you're dividing by ten you're going from thirty seven eighty two to three seventy to three seventy eight that's a huge difference so this situation here really describes the US situation when it comes to vehicles under thirty thousand here is domestic production however the demand for vehicles is all the way over here so these are imports that is what is imported into the US and the US would like to change that situation say well they should be made in in the US well if you have a small tariff let's say you put a tariff over here you're not going to get rid of imports you may you may get some increase in domestic production but the price would be higher and these this here would be the revenue that the government would generate but this would be the quantity of imports now the imports have shrunk there is some revenue the economy does lose some money on that but everything under this curve was consumer surplus so consumer surplus takes a hit what do we mean by that well if you paid thirty thousand for a vehicle let's say this new price was thirty one thousand after that small tariff well now you're going to pay thirty one thousand the sum of all those one thousand dollars across all the vehicle sold in the US is now not available to be spent somewhere else that means the surplus the consumer had is is is lower so the higher the price the less surplus there is the less money they have to spend somewhere else so sure you were able to maybe increase some employment and production in the US but at a higher price at the expense of that the sum of all those thousand dollars being spent in other places which would take away production and employment in those other places but what we want to do or at least what the administration would like do is get rid of this imports all together which is sort of at odds with what they're saying Trump is saying oh these tariffs are going to raise billions of dollars for the US well if they're going to raise billions of dollars that means the imports aren't really going to change or go away but by saying it's going to bring jobs back to America you have to get this price high enough that it does justify no imports that it does bring the jobs back to America and if it does then you're going to raise no money with tariffs being that they're saying all the good stuff and none of the bad stuff I get the feeling that they're really just looking at a first year economics textbook and looking at the graphs considering caterous parabits in other words they're not allowing other things to change let's raise the tariff up to here let's make it a big tariff in other words let's put 25 percent tariff on this thing so that it's not 37 30 thousand dollars anymore it's 37 thousand five hundred dollars because we put a 25 percent tariff on there let's draw that out here is our demand here is our supply and now we're going to put a tariff up here we're going to raise the price to 37 five because we really want to encourage the market to move towards domestic production here is where we were before this was our imports well now look at where we are demand is down here supplies up here domestic supply would be up there you have a production you have a production surplus and now you don't need anymore imports because you crushed demand enough you've raised the price 37 five such that you can use higher cost labor to get it done in the US because now the domestic price will be 37 five if I'm importing the vehicle and it's 37 five and I'm making some of it domestically why would I ever sell it for 30 thousand when when the price is now 37 five I will sell it for 37 five the only way I'm going to make more of those vehicles by the way is if it is 37 five hundred dollars I need I need margin to bridge those vehicles because they are such low margin vehicles so there we are we got rid of imports now the thinking is well this is what we're hoping will happen is not just to move along the supply curve but an actual shift of the supply curve by companies setting up their facilities in the US so we have a new supply curve supply has shifted outwards because there is more productive capacity and if that's the case there's the new price it's not 37 five it's somewhat lower and if we're really lucky we can really convince supply to show up here there'd be no change in price we'd still have the same quantity demanded consumers will still say we want this much we set up all the production facility in here we have a shift of the supply curve outwards to move back down the price bringing the jobs back to America employing more Americans increasing the capacity to supply the market with these vehicles and getting rid of imports all together so if we had that outcome how much are the US raising in tariffs at this point zero but we have production and we've maintained consumer surplus because we are now producing at the same price this by the way cannot happen this would never happen it cannot happen and this just comes down to the economics of the vehicle I don't know who said this I I'm going to attribute it to a previous CEO of Walmart I think if you do not have a cost advantage do not compete on cost here's what's going to happen when you look at margins of vehicles the higher the price of the vehicle the higher the margin the lower the price of the vehicle the lower the margin I'm not talking about dollar amounts I'm talking in terms of percent so that a sub 30,000 dollar vehicle might have a 1.5% margin but an SUV might have a 15% margin the higher the price of the vehicle the greater the margin is which means you can operate a plant with lower volume because your contribution margin the dollars you make per vehicle this is your selling price minus your variable costs you're selling price minus your variable costs if you multiply that by your quantity and divide it by your fixed cost you'll get your your cost per vehicle that you have to achieve you need a certain amount of volume to cover off your fixed costs the higher the margin the lower the volume that you would need the smaller the margin the higher the volume you would need if you attempted to reshore all of the production of 30,000 dollar vehicles or less you would massively overproduce for the American market that's why they're made in Mexico because you need to produce in very large scale at low cost so from the Mexican facility they are imported into the US to meet the demand there but you still have more the US can't absorb everything that's being made so it gets sent to other Latin American and South American countries and because they have lower GDP per capita lower income per person you have to be able to sell that vehicle at a lower price so you cannot you cannot have that much production in the US because if you did have that much production in the US you have to rely on exports and you would need far more production in the US than you would need Mexico because you now have to overcome a $37 wage not a $3.70 wage so you would have to make so many more cars to cover off because your contribution margin would be even lower because your labor costs are 10 times greater so you have to make a hell of a lot more which means you have to export a hell of a lot more well if you had done this diplomatically well maybe you could export but because of the method of doing this you get 25% you get 25 you're all ripping us off there will be retaliation which means good luck exporting those vehicles because other countries are going to say well it's a lot more expensive now that's the point of making them in Mexico is because you have to be able to take all the excess capacity which you need to generate to be profitable on that plant and you got to sell it somewhere else no one market can absorb that much so what are you going to have happen over here if you actually got to S prime prime as you'd have some auto manufacturers saying we can't make money because we can't export our vehicles so we're going to have to cut production and if we have to cut production some of us aren't going to be profitable so this supply curve will start to shift backwards and the price will start to shift upwards so that those that are remaining will be profitable you cannot make a sub thirty thousand dollar vehicle in the US because you can't make it in the volume necessary to drive the cost down far enough to cover the overhead costs because what are you going to do with all that extra supply now that you've been belligerent to every country that you want to import into they're just going to put retaliatory tariffs on your vehicle so you're you're not going to be able to get that done so that's the goal that they want to achieve and and they simply stop short they say that's where we're going to get to everyone's going to set up in the US we're going to get to S prime prime and they have announcements every couple of days of companies announcing new factories that they're going to set up within the US but if they do get that done you can say goodbye to the sub thirty thousand dollar vehicle that will disappear which means consumers surplus disappears those consumers have left less to spend somewhere else well how can we fix that and remember there are there are only trade-offs what what what what we do to fix that situation well what we can do is try to make the vehicle cheaper even though it can't be made cheaper the only way to do that is to subsidize the purchase of that vehicle but if you subsidize the purchase of that vehicle aren't you just doing the very thing that the US is accusing other countries of doing of subsidizing their industries so they can dump cheap product onto America like China by the way if the US got its way reciprocal tariffs what if what if there were zero tariffs across the board on any countries on any countries goods or any country that is accepting US goods what if you went to zero tariffs would that mean that the US would charge zero tariffs right zero tariffs on US product coming into the country so zero tariffs on stuff coming into the US wouldn't that open the door for Chinese EVs and the US cannot compete with that so the US would say well no no not Chinese EVs because it is state supported it is the government supports that industry well how are you going to get that vehicle in the US that you're thinking that you want under 30,000 if it can only be made for 37,000 in the US you got to have some kind of subsidy to get the price down is that not the same thing as China is doing what have they proposed as the subsidy in case you missed it it was tax deductibility for interest payments on car loans tax deductibility for interest payments and because it's the lower incomes that tend to finance their vehicles it would be a progressive tax in that sense because most lower income people the bottom 50% typically finance their vehicles the top 10 or 20% typically pay cash for their vehicles they wouldn't have the deductibility of the interest payment the bottom 50% don't make a choice they pretty much have to finance their vehicle and we know that most people don't pay attention to the sticker price they pay they pay attention to the monthly rate that they pay you'll go from five year loans to six year loans to get that done and since you can deduct the interest off of your off of your tax the after tax cost of the vehicle would be lower well isn't that a subsidy isn't that a subsidy from the government to the auto industry to support it this is a transfer from the taxpayer to the auto manufacturer which as a shareholder of GM because I do own GM I have no problem with that I hope the US does in fact implement interest deductibility from income for tax purposes because it would benefit the auto makers incredibly here's how this situation would play out because we do have to think about caterers parabits this is never true by the way only because the economy is doesn't allow it to be economics has to invoke it to be able to say anything economics is not the problem the system is the problem there's always trade-offs let's look at what will happen right now you have 0% interest on some cars that you can buy but if you take a vehicle that was selling for $90,000 it will be now $98,000 at 0% if you tell the dealer and you can do this try it for yourself go into any dealership that's offering APR says I don't need your APR I'm just going to pay straight up cash I've got cash you'll see the price of this vehicle drop why and this was told to me by somebody who is in the industry who runs a dealership saying this is how it's done this difference over here this $8,000 is the present value of all of the interest rate payments the car manufacture would have to make to the bondholders so the dealership will sell $90,000 in bonds to back this and it may have to offer 6% on that over five years so it figures out what all the interest payments are going to be it takes the present value and it increases the price by the present value so you are paying interest on that vehicle it's just in the price of the vehicle that's how you get to 0% APR there is no 0% it's in illusion it's a lie you're all being lied to there is no 0% interest it's in the price of the vehicle if you said look I don't need your 0% I'm going to pay cash you'll see how quickly that price comes down the present value of all the interest payments comes right out well if I can do this if I can bring the interest rate down to 0 by bringing the price of the car up I can go in the reverse order because if it wasn't 6% of I said well it's a 6% loan then it would be a $90,000 vehicle not a $98,000 vehicle what if I said it's an 8% loan wouldn't that be an $88,000 vehicle or 89 or 89,223 wouldn't be lower but if I said it was a 10% loan couldn't I get that out the door for 86,000 see where I'm going with that so you can get to a sub $30,000 vehicle I'm just going to make the interest rate higher that you pay but don't you worry good sir that interest is tax deductible so what we'll do is we'll put some of the purchase price of the vehicle into the interest rate to give you a better after tax cost will manage this down that is going to be a huge transfer payment from the taxpayer to GM thank you very much taxpayer for supporting my bottom line because that's the money that I get I get that money the investor class gets that money that is the unintended consequence what's I going to do it'll make the deficit even worse doesn't make the deficit better so if you actually get to this point what is the unintended consequence of getting there is that you will destroy half the brands that are out there half the car companies are going to say we can't make money at this level the ones that are left will be selling these 30 30 thousand dollar vehicles for 37 thousand dollars at 36 thousand dollars and if you do get the interest tax deductibility they can then lower the price back to 30 thousand by offering you a 15% loan don't worry the 15% is good for you because you get to deduct all that interest and if you're deducting that interest you're not paying those taxes if you're not paying those taxes revenues go down revenues goes down the deficit gets even bigger deficit gets even bigger interest rates go even higher interest rates go higher then the interest rate on this thing has to also go higher which means the interest rate deductibility goes goes higher, which means tax revenues go lower, which means the deficit goes wider. You see what happens on the other side. There are only trade-offs. And the higher those rates go, the more it crushes other activity in the economy as well. Okay, let's go back to our original supply and demand chart. And let's start thinking about all things equal. Let's draw this out again. There is actually we're going to draw it out two ways. Okay, there is our chart. But here we're going to put price in here. We're going to put quantity. Here we're going to put value in here. We're going to put quantity. This would be demand. This would be supply here. It's the other way around. This is demand. This is supply. What is this saying? The reason I don't like price, I don't I don't want to call this the law of supply and demand. I prefer to call it the strong tendency is because I can raise my price and raise demand at the same time if my value proposition increases. So let's say that I increase the size or increase the quality of what I'm giving you and I increase my price. So let's say that I was giving you 50 units of quality. However we measure that and I decide to give you 75 units of quality. Instead of 10 bucks, I'm going to charge you 12 bucks. I've raised my price 20%. But I've increased the quality by 50%. So that the value you get per dollar has increased. So I can raise my price and raise demand if I increase the value proposition that goes with it. So under value as the value proposition increases demand would also increase. You can increase the value proposition by giving the same stuff at lower prices. That's what this chart is over here. Or giving greater value for the same price. And you can increase demand even though price is not moving. Or increase the value faster than you increase the price. You'll still get an increase in demand. So I much prefer this chart over here. Here is where we were originally which would put us over here. Supply would be very low. Demand would be very high and the problem is solved with imports. And it's the same thing over here because of this low price. The value proposition for consumers is very high. So demand is over here. But not so much for suppliers. They can't meet that value proposition. So this is the amount that is met with imports. It's really just the inverse of what we're looking at over here. But this gets us past the unfortunate situation of saying, well, wait a minute. If you raise your price, you'll lose sales. No, not if you increase the value proposition. You want to increase demand, increase the value proposition. That means you can continue to raise prices as long as you continue to raise the value higher than that. For those that have been through my CFA courses or the applied level, I've always followed that that dictum that I don't mind raising prices because costs increase. You have to raise your prices, but you got to find a way to deliver more value if you're going to raise your price period. The value proposition must get better even though your price is increasing. So how do we, how do we keep caterers' parabas? Which means if we have a tariff, we can get to a point, let's say we can figure out where that tariff is such that we don't have to rely on imports any longer and domestic production picks everything up. How do we get there? You get there by making sure that the least amount of variables change, which means you don't want consumer behavior to change. You don't want anything else to change anywhere in the system. The least amount of change possible, the more likely this outcome is to to be the strong tendency of what the state would be, the state of the system would be after the change in one variable. To do that, you must be very diplomatic and you must get there incrementally. One big move like this is too much of a dislocation. You have to get there very incrementally over a period of time such that nobody really sees it coming and that there's plenty of time for adjustments within there and that no consumer in any other market decides that they're going to change their behavior because of this. Because this is just one product in one market. On the other side of this is every other country's same supply curve for the same thing that you're doing. And if you say, well, we're going to put our tariffs on here coming into this market. If you have retaliation, then every market is going to do the same thing. And they're not going to retaliate if it doesn't if it doesn't affect you, they're going to retaliate where it does affect you. So you're going to have an offset in another industry. Perhaps there's another industry that relies on exporting and suddenly will be a tariff on that. Now they can't export their software. So whatever you create over here, you will destroy somewhere else. And that is that is invoking a stronger form of or a weaker form of all things change. Well, we didn't do it incrementally. These are big jumps all at once. We didn't do it diplomatically. You you could say this is probably the single most undiplomatic trade policy out of the US ever extremely undiplomatic, even belligerent. So there is already the announcement of you. If you raise tariffs on us, we will do it to you too. There'll be retaliation even though the tariffs on when's their reciprocal. There's already being announcements that we will retaliate. Not only that, consumers in other countries have now started to retaliate as well. So all of this is off the table because we cannot hold all things constant. All of that is off the table. So hopefully on day of liberation, the one guy or hopefully the administration will try to impress upon that one guy that we must get as close to this as possible. All things held constant. And now he's sort of been threatening. The car companies don't you dare raise your prices. Don't you dare raise your prices trying to keep all things the same. It's been saying the other countries, if you even think of retaliating, we're going to double the tariffs trying to keep all things the same. But you cannot threaten the consumers in other countries. Say if you don't keep buying American, we're going to hunt you down. We're going to get you. You can't say that. And that's already going on. So we are not at the caterist parabess. Although although the guy is trying to get there, he's trying to get there from threats. On Wednesday, will he get there by taking a softer stance? No one will fault him for China. No one would would fault him much for India, 70% on the way into India. No one would fault him much for that. Germany, yeah, their protectionist is well, no one would fault them there. But Canada and Mexico are two. The US's advantage because the US cannot make a sub 30,000 dollar vehicle. It cannot. It cannot produce at the volume necessary to satisfy its market and export all the others with the technique that it's used to date. So it's a it's a lose lose situation across the board. Will he be far more focused and will he will he deliver to the market some certainty that is needed? None of this 30 day bullshit of let's do this in another 30 days. Let's do this in another 30 days because money will just go to another market where there's certainty. Could pull it off. It it depends on on this caterist parabess. How close can he get to all else constant? How can he put these things in place and get these charts to work the way he wants? The only way they work that way is if you have a very strong form of all things equal. Which means you have to minimize everything else and that's not going to be done with threats. It has to be done with policy. It has to be far more diplomatic and understandable. That's the uncertainty. Is this guy going to do that? And that's what we'll find out on Wednesday maybe on my Q&A my weekly Q&A. I'll wait till Wednesday to do it and we'll see what the results are and then we can sort of look at how it affects this and we'll have some kind of maybe I can do a commentary in real time of how how we think it's going to affect that. That's it.